.. _version1:

======================================
Format of the v1.0 Slater-Koster files
======================================

Introduction
============

Every Slater-Koster file distributed from the
`dftb.org <http://www.dftb.org>`__ site (with the file extension ’.skf’)
consists of two main blocks:

-  The data block (the first part of the .skf files) and

-  The documentation (second part, starting with the XML-tag
   ``<Documentation>``).

The second part is currently not usually parsed by DFTB codes.

Format of the data block
========================

The data block contains the data necessary to calculate the two center
interactions. It has basically two parts:

- Header data (including an optional polynomial repulsive interaction) followed
  by integral tables describing the Hamiltonian and overlap matrix elements on
  an equidistant grid.

- Spline representation of the repulsive interaction (optional).

Below the description of the individual parts follows. The format is line
based. Numbers representing physical quantities are given in atomic units (with
Hartree being the energy unit) unless explicitly noted otherwise.

Header and integral tables
--------------------------

Only angular momenta up to :math:`d` are contained in thew SK table, but the
headers differ for the hetero-nuclear and the homo-nuclear case.

Homo-nuclear case
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Line 1: gridDist nGridPoints

``gridDist`` being the distance between the grid points of the integral table,
and ``nGridPoints`` being the number of points in the table.

Line 2: Ed Ep Es SPE Ud Up Us fd fp fs

``Ed``, ``Ep`` and ``Es`` are the on-site energies for the angular momenta
:math:`d`, :math:`p` and :math:`s` for the given atom. The field ``SPE`` is read
but not interpreted in the current DFTB model (was spin polarisation error for
calculating formation energies in very early DFTB implementations, now
superceeded by full spin polarization). ``Ud``, ``Up``, ``Us`` are the Hubbard U
values for the appropriate angular momenta, and ``fd``, ``fp``, ``fs`` are the
occupations (for the neutral atom) in the ground state.

Line 3: mass c2 c3 c4 c5 c6 c7 c8 c9 rcut d1 d2 d3 d4 d5 d6 d7 d8 d9 d10

where ``mass`` is the mass of the given atom in atomic mass units (!), ``c2``,
…, ``c9`` and ``rcut`` are the polynomial coefficients and the cutoff radius of
the repulsive interaction (can be zero, if the repulsive is described by
splines). The other numbers are only placeholders and can have arbitrary
values. The polynomial repulsive is calculated as

.. math:: 
   \sum_{i=2}^9 c_i (r_{\text{cut}} - r)^i.

Lines 4 to (4 + ``nGridPoints`` - 1):

::

      Hdd0 Hdd1 Hdd2 Hpd0 Hpd1 Hpp0 Hpp1 Hsd0 Hsp0 Hss0 Sdd0 Sdd1 Sdd2 Spd0 Spd1
      Spp0 Spp1 Ssd0 Ssp0 Sss0

Integral table containing the DFTB Hamiltonian and the overlap matrix elements
for the two center interactions :math:`dd^\sigma`, :math:`dd^\pi`,
:math:`dd^\delta`, :math:`pd^\sigma`, :math:`pd^\pi`, :math:`pp^\sigma`,
:math:`pp^\pi`, :math:`sd^\sigma`, :math:`sp^\sigma` and :math:`ss^\sigma`
between the atomic orbitals. The first line of this block corresponds to the
distance ``gridDist`` (:math:`|\mathbf{r}_0|`) between the atoms, for every
following line the distance is increased by ``gridDist``. The Hamiltonian matrix
element is

.. math::

   \left< \phi_\mu(\mathbf r) \left| - \frac{1}{2} \nabla^2 +
   v_{\text{eff}}[n^\alpha(\mathbf r)] + v_{\text{eff}}[n^\beta(\mathbf r -
   \mathbf r_0)] \right| \phi_\nu(\mathbf r - \mathbf r_0) \right> \qquad
   \mu\in\alpha, \nu\in\beta

.. math::

   \left< \phi_\mu(\mathbf r) \left| - \frac{1}{2} \nabla^2 +
   v_{\text{eff}}[n^\alpha(\mathbf r)+n^\beta(\mathbf r - \mathbf r_0)] \right|
   \phi_\nu(\mathbf r - \mathbf r_0) \right> \qquad \mu\in\alpha, \nu\in\beta

for the potential and the density superposition case, respectively.
:math:`n^\alpha` and :math:`n^\beta` are the atomic densities,
:math:`v_{\text{eff}}` is the effective potential. The overlap is

.. math::

   \left< \phi_\mu(\mathbf{r}) \left| \phi_\nu(\mathbf{r}-\mathbf{r}_0) \right.
   \right>
   \qquad \mu\in\alpha, \nu\in\beta

For both types of integrals, the direction of :math:`\mathbf r_0` is chosen to
align the relevant orbitals :math:`\mu` and :math:`\nu` in the appropriate
orientation for :math:`\sigma`, :math:`\pi`, :math:`\delta`, etc. bonding. The
angular dependent part of the atomic orbitals is of tesseral harmonic form to be
compatible with the Slater-Koster transformations.


Hetero-nuclear case
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Line 1: The same as line 1 in the homo-nuclear case.

Line 2: The same as line 3 in the homo-nuclear case, however the
``mass`` field is just a placeholder.

Lines 3 to (3 + ``nGridPoints`` - 1): The same as lines 4 to (4 +
``nGridPoints`` - 1) in the homo-nuclear case.


Spline repulsive
----------------

This part describes the repulsive interaction via splines. It is optional, as
the header contains coefficients for a polynomial description which can be used
instead of the splines. The spline block (if present) contains following lines:

Line 1: Spline

Simple line with the string ’\ ``Spline``\ ’ indicating the start of the block
with the spline repulsive.

Line 2: nInt cutoff

with ``nInt`` being the number of (subsequent) intervals being described by
various cubic splines and ``cutoff`` the cutoff of the repulsive interaction.

Line 3: a1 a2 a3

Coefficients to describe the exponential part of the repulsive (which is applied
if the atoms are closer as the starting distance of the first spline). The
repulsive in that region is described by the exponential expression

.. math:: e^{-a_1 r + a_2} + a_3

with :math:`r` being the distance between the atoms.

Lines 4 to 4 + ``nInt`` - 2:

::

    start end c0 c1 c2 c3

with ``start`` (:math:`r_0`) and ``end`` describing the bounds of the distance
range, on which the current spline describes the repulsive interaction as

.. math:: c_0 + c_1 (r - r_0) + c_2 (r - r_0)^2 + c_3 (r - r_0)^3\text.

Please note, that ``end`` is read but not interpreted the specific `DFTB+
<http://www.dftb-plus.info>`__ implementation, as the end of an interval is
taken to be equal to the start of the next interval. Nevertheless ``end`` should
be specified in each line correctly, as other DFTB implementations may depend on
it.

Line 4 +\ ``nInt`` - 1:

::

    start end c0 c1 c2 c3 c4 c5

with ``start`` (:math:`r_0`) and ``end`` describing the bounds of the distance
range, on which the last spline describes the repulsive interaction as

.. math::

   c_0 + c_1 (r - r_0) + c_2 (r - r_0)^2 + c_3 (r - r_0)^3 + c_4 (r -
   r_0)^4 + c_5 (r - r_0)^5 \text.

Please note, that ``end`` is read but not interpreted by the specific `DFTB+
<http://www.dftb-plus.info>`__ implementation, as the end of the last interval
is taken to be equal to ``cutoff``. Nevertheless ``end`` should be specified in
each line correctly, as other DFTB implementations may depend on it.
