.. _version1.0:

===================================
Format of the v1.0 header extension
===================================

If the first character of the first line is ``@``, then the header and the
integral table follows the extended v1.0 format, allowing angular momenta up to
:math:`f`.

Homo-nuclear case
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Line 1: Comment line, starting with ``@`` as the first character.

Line 2: Identical with line 1 in the :ref:`version0.9` format.

Line 3: ``Ef`` ``Ed`` ``Ep`` ``Es`` ``SPE`` ``Uf`` ``Ud`` ``Up`` ``Us`` ``ff``
``fd`` ``fp`` ``fs``

where ``Ef``, ``Ed``, ``Ep`` and ``Es`` are the on-site energies for the angular
momenta :math:`f`, :math:`d`, :math:`p` and :math:`s` for the given atom. The
field ``SPE`` is read but not interpreted by the specific DFTB+ (was spin
polarisation error for calculating formation energies in very early DFTB
implementations, now superceeded by full spin polarization). ``Uf``, ``Ud``,
``Up``, ``Us`` are the Hubbard U values for the appropriate angular momenta, and
``ff``, ``fd``, ``fp`` and ``fs`` are the occupations (for the neutral atom).

Line 4: Identical with line 3 in the simple format.

Lines 5 to (5 + ``nGridPoints`` - 1):

::

      Hff0 Hff1 Hff2 Hff3 Hdf0 Hdf1 Hdf2 Hdd0 Hdd1 Hdd2 Hpf0 Hpf1 Hpd0 Hpd1
      Hpp0 Hpp1 Hsf0 Hsd0 Hsp0 Hss0  Sff0 Sff1 Sff2 Sff3 Sdf0 Sdf1 Sdf2 Sdd0
      Sdd1 Sdd2  Spf0 Spf1 Spd0 Spd1 Spp0 Spp1 Ssf0 Ssd0 Ssp0 Sss0

Integral table containing the Hamiltonian matrix elements and the
overlaps for the two center interactions :math:`ff^\sigma`,
:math:`ff^\pi`, :math:`ff^\delta` :math:`ff^\phi`, :math:`df^\sigma`,
:math:`df^\pi`, :math:`df^\delta`, :math:`dd^\sigma`, :math:`dd^\pi`,
:math:`dd^\delta`, :math:`pf^\sigma`, :math:`pf^\pi`, :math:`pd^\sigma`,
:math:`pd^\pi`, :math:`pp^\sigma`, :math:`pp^\pi`, :math:`sf^\sigma`,
:math:`sd^\sigma`, :math:`sp^\sigma`, :math:`ss^\sigma`. The first line
of this block corresponds to the distance ``gridDist`` between the
atoms, for every following line the distance is increased by
``gridDist``. (The angular dependent part of the atomic orbitals in the
integrals is assumed being described by tesseral harmonics.)

Hetero-nuclear case
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Line 1: Identical to line 1 in the homo-nuclear case.

Lines 2 to 3: Identical to lines 1 to 2 in the simple format
(hetero-nuclear case).

Lines 4 to (4 + ``nGridPoints`` - 1): Identical to lines 5 to (5 +
``nGridPoints`` - 1) in the homo-nuclear case.
