.. _version2.0:

=========================================
Draft format of the v2.0 extended SK data
=========================================

This format breaks backward compatibility with previous versions and uses a machine-readible
structured data (MSD) format to organise the data.


The MSD 1.0 format
==================

This file format is extensible (within some limits) and consists of a series of tagged environments
(which can be nested) together with labelled blocks of data. The data blocks can occur outside of an
environment, and have fields that describe the type, number and layout of their associated data.

The format is currently encoded in ASCII (but binary encoding is planned for a later version).
Environments and tag names are limited to a maximum of 100 characters and must be lower case but can
contain numerical values and the underscore symbol (characters [a-z0-9_]). The line length is
limited to a maximum of 1024 characters, and only unix compliant line endings are accepted.

`qn. should there be a version tag for MSD (for example if extended precision
tags get added later?`

Environments
------------

The general structure of an environment is a paired starting and ending tag, deliminated with a pair
of labelled brace brackets::

 {environment
 
 {subenvironment
 
 }subenvironment
 
 }environment

Environments can be repeated, and an unterminated environment is considered to continue until the
end of the file (all subsequent environments and tags being within that environment).

Environment names should be lower case and can contain numerical values and
underscore characters ([a-z0-9_]).

Generic format of an MSD data block
-----------------------------------

Each section starts with a block label, begining with ``@`` as the first character at the start of
the line, followed by the block's name which must be lower case and can contain numerical values and
the underscore character ([a-z0-9_]). The format of the block data will depend on the nature of the
data tag.

The data type and number of entries in the section are then specified, along with (if required) the
dimensioning of the data. The precision models of the data maps on to corresponding FORTRAN
variables (as defined in the Fortran 2008 standard).

+------+-----------------+
| Data | Type            |
+------+-----------------+
| l    | Logical         |
+------+-----------------+
| i4   | int32           |
+------+-----------------+
| i8   | int64           |
+------+-----------------+
| r4   | real32          |
+------+-----------------+
| r8   | real64          |
+------+-----------------+
| c4   | Complex real32  |
+------+-----------------+
| c8   | Complex real64  |
+------+-----------------+
| sNNN | String of length|
|      | NNN characters  |
+------+-----------------+

The generic format for a scalar or vector valued tags is ::

  @label:type:shape

where label is the block label, type is the data identifier and shape specifies the number of data
elements. Any indices within shape are separated by comma characters. For, corresponding to a
FORTRAN array shape of (2,3) of integers::

  @data:i4:3,2
  1 2
  3 4
  5 6

If the block contain only a single scalar value, :shape is not specified.

Each element in the associated data is white space delimited (valid delimiters are one or more
spaces or unix new line characters).

`qn. what about multidimensional data, extra commas?`

Specific data types
-------------------

Logical
~~~~~~~

Logical values represented as a single upper case character

+-+-----+
|T|true |
+-+-----+
|F|false|
+-+-----+

For example ::

  @sky_blue:l:1
  T
  @up_is_down:l:2
  F
  T
  @table_of_logicals:l:2,3
  T F F
  F T T

Integer
~~~~~~~

32 bit integer, for example ::

  @values:i4:3
  1 2 3

`qn. what about field length for integers? White space padded, leading 0 values, ...?`
  
Long integer
~~~~~~~~~~~~

64 bit integer, for example ::

  @longvalues:i8
  2147483647

Real
~~~~

Single precision real (floating point numbers), corresponding to fortran real32. The number of
significant digits for Single Precision Literals is 7, with 3 digit mantissa::

  @real:r4:1,2
  1.0000000e0 1.0000000e1


Double precision
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Corresponding to fortran real64. The number of significant digits for Double Precision Literals is
15, any digits beyond this will be truncated.::

  @real:r8:1,2
  1.000000000000000e0 1.000000000000000e1

Complex
~~~~~~~

Single precision complex values (corresponding to a pair of real32 values). Both real and imaginary
parts are specified with delimiting white space(s)::
  
  @complex_value:c4:2
  1.0000000e0 -1.0000000e0
  0.0000000e0  1.0000000e0

Corresponding to the values :math:`1.0 - 1.0 i` and :math:`1.0 i`.
  
`qn. what about new line characters between real and imaginary parts?`

Double complex
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Corresponding a pair of fortran real64 values. Both real and imaginary parts are specified with
delimiting white space::
  
  @complex_value:c4:2
  1.00000000000000e0 -1.0e0
  0.0  1.0

String
~~~~~~

Ascii character string of specified maximum length. The string starts after the
new line character of the block specifier. `The the string can be prematurely
terminated by a new line character. (?)` ::

  @s11:1
  10charaters

The Slater-Koster environments and blocks
=========================================


Distinct from previous versions, atomic (homo-nuclear) data is stored into a
single file for each atom, while the heteroatomic data for a pair is packaged
into a ``single`` data file for each pair of elements, instead of an asymmetric
pair of files.

List of data blocks
-------------------

+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| Keyword                      |Notes                                |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@homo_nuclear`_             | Compulsary                          |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@basis`_                    | Compulsary                          |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@reference_occupations`_    | Compulsary                          |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@tabulated`_                | Compulsary                          |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@hamiltonian_integrals`_    | Compulsary if `@tabulated`_ true    |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@overlap_integrals`_        | Compulsary if `@tabulated`_ true    |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@repulsive_polynomial`_     | Compulsary if `@tabulated`_ true    |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@repulsive_spline`_         | Compulsary if `@tabulated`_ true    |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@repulsive_grid`_           | Compulsary if `@tabulated`_ true    |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@xml_documentation`_        | Compulsary                          |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@atomic_mass`_              | Compulsary if `@homo_nuclear`_ true |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@atomic_number`_            | Compulsary if `@homo_nuclear`_ true |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@onsite_energies`_          | Compulsary if `@homo_nuclear`_ true |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@basis_fns`_                | Compulsary if `@homo_nuclear`_ true |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@atomic_hubbard_us`_        | Compulsary if `@homo_nuclear`_ true |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@atomic_spin_ws`_           | Compulsary if `@homo_nuclear`_ true |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@atomic_third_order`_       | Optional if `@homo_nuclear`_ true   |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@atomic_spinorbit_xis`_     | Optional if `@homo_nuclear`_ true   |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@atomic_onsite_corection`_  | Optional if `@homo_nuclear`_ true   |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@atomic_trans_dipole`_      | Optional if `@homo_nuclear`_ true   |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| `@atomic_dipole_corection`_  | Optional if `@homo_nuclear`_ true   |
+------------------------------+-------------------------------------+


Data stored in blocks
---------------------

.. _@homo_nuclear: 

``@homo_nuclear``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Logical variable whether the atomic pair being described is homo- or
hetero-nuclear. The homonuclear case requires additional data blocks to be
present, specifiying additional atomic data.

  | Line 1 : ``T`` or ``F``

.. _@tabulated: 

``@tabulated``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Logical variable whether the S-K information is tabulated on a grid, or should be dynamically
evaluated

  | Line 1 : ``T`` or ``F``

.. _@basis:

``@basis``
~~~~~~~~~~

Atomic basis functions, specified as total number of angular shells of functions
followed by the indivdual angular momentum of each shell and a unique text label
for each shell of functions. The label cannot contain whitespace characters.

  | Line 1 : nshells
  | Line 2 : l\ :sub:`1` label\ :sub:`1`  
  | …
  | Line nshells : l\ :sub:`nshells` label\ :sub:`nshells`

.. _@hamiltonian_integrals:

``@hamiltonian_integrals``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Diatomic integral table containing the DFTB Hamiltonian between the atomic orbitals on a regular
radial grid. The first line of this block corresponds to the number of radial distances ``nGrid``,
the starting radial distance for the first elements ``r0`` and the grid separation ``gridDist``
between the atoms, for every following line the distance is increased by ``gridDist``. Both
distances are specified in atomic units. It is strongly suggested that ``r0`` should be chosen to be
0, i.e. the table should be available down to the nuclear position.

The data is column ordered as :math:`l_1 l_2 m`, where the right most index is the fastest to
iterate and :math:`0 \geq m \leq min(l_1,l_2)`. The shells are , :math:`l_1` and :math:`l_2`
correspond to the 

In the case of heteronuclear files, the 

  | nGrid r0 gridDist

.. _@overlap_integrals:

``@overlap_integrals``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The overlap integrals should correspond to the angular ordering and grid used to store the
hamiltonian elements. The overlap between functions is given by

.. math::

   \left< \phi_\mu(\mathbf{r}) \left| \phi_\nu(\mathbf{r}-\mathbf{r}_0) \right.
   \right>
   \qquad \mu\in\alpha, \nu\in\beta

.. _@repulsive_spline:

``@repulsive_spline``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Repulsive data specified as an exponential at short distance matched to a spline
at longer distance. The format of the block is

  | Line 1: nInt cutoff

with ``nInt`` being the number of (subsequent) intervals being described by
various cubic splines and ``cutoff`` the cutoff of the repulsive interaction.

  | Line 2: a\ :sub:`1` a\ :sub:`2` a\ :sub:`3`

Coefficients a\ :sub:`1`, a\ :sub:`2`, a\ :sub:`3` describe the exponential part
of the repulsive (which is applied if the atoms are closer as the starting
distance of the first spline). The repulsive in that region is described by the
exponential expression

.. math:: e^{-a_1 r + a_2} + a_3

with :math:`r` being the distance between the atoms.

  | Lines 3 to 3 + ``nInt`` - 2:



    start end c\ :sub:`0` c\ :sub:`1` c\ :sub:`2` c\ :sub:`3`

with ``start`` (:math:`r_0`) and ``end`` describing the bounds of the distance
range, on which the current spline describes the repulsive interaction as

.. math:: c_0 + c_1 (r - r_0) + c_2 (r - r_0)^2 + c_3 (r - r_0)^3\text.

Please note, that ``end`` is read but not interpreted the specific `DFTB+
<http://www.dftb-plus.info>`__ implementation, as the end of an interval is
taken to be equal to the start of the next interval. Nevertheless ``end`` should
be specified in each line correctly, as other DFTB implementations may depend on
it.

  | Line 3 +\ ``nInt`` - 1:

    start end d\ :sub:`0` d\ :sub:`1` d\ :sub:`2` d\ :sub:`3` d\ :sub:`4` d\
    :sub:`5`

with ``start`` (:math:`r_0`) and ``end`` describing the bounds of the distance
range, on which the last spline describes the repulsive interaction as

.. math::

   d_0 + d_1 (r - r_0) + d_2 (r - r_0)^2 + d_3 (r - r_0)^3 + d_4 (r - r_0)^4 +
   d_5 (r - r_0)^5 \text.

Please note, that ``end`` is read but not interpreted by the specific `DFTB+
<http://www.dftb-plus.info>`__ implementation, as the end of the last interval
is taken to be equal to ``cutoff``. Nevertheless ``end`` should be specified in
each line correctly, as other DFTB implementations may depend on it.


.. _@repulsive_polynomial:

``@repulsive_polynomial``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Repulsive data specified as a 9\ :sup:`th` order polynomial function given on a
single line

c\ :sub:`2` c\ :sub:`3` c\ :sub:`4` c\ :sub:`5` c\ :sub:`6` c\ :sub:`7` c\
:sub:`8` c\ :sub:`9` r\ :sub:`cut`

Where c\ :sub:`2`, …, c\ :sub:`9` and r\ :sub:`cut` are the polynomial coefficients
and the cutoff radius of the repulsive interaction.

.. math:: 
   \sum_{i=2}^9 c_i (r_{\text{cut}} - r)^i.

c\ :sub:`0` and c\ :sub:`1` are both implicitly zero.

.. _@repulsive_grid:

``@repulsive_grid``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Repulsive data specified as a set of raw (x,y) values

.. _@xml_documentation: 

``@xml_documentation``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Documentation in xml format covering the creation, test systems and
applicability and the publications the author of the file requires to be cited.


.. _@atomic_mass:

``@atomic_mass``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

..
   Why include this if the atomic number is present?

Default mass of the given atom in atomic mass units (!)

  | Line 1: mass

Value is only present for homonuclear files, and is the average isotopic mass of the element.

``@atomic_number``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Atomic number of the atom

  | Line 1: Z

Value is only present for homonuclear files.

.. _@onsite_energies:

``@onsite_energies``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Onsite energies for the basis functions (Hartree), one value for each shell

  | Line 1 : E\ :sub:`1` E\ :sub:`2` … E\ :sub:`nshells`

.. _@reference_occupations:

``@reference_occupations``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Neutral atomic reference occupations for the atom in its ground state

  | Line 1 : n\ :sub:`1` n\ :sub:`2` … n\ :sub:`nshells`

.. _@basis_fns:


``@basis_fns``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Basis states for the atom, currently listed for Slater-type orbitals (STOs)



.. _@atomic_hubbard_us:

``@atomic_hubbard_us``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Hubbard U values for the atomic shells

  | Line 1 : U\ :sub:`1` U\ :sub:`2` … U\ :sub:`nshells`

.. _@atomic_spin_ws:

``@atomic_spin_ws``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Matrix of atomic spin derivatives

+--------------+---------------------+---------------------+---+---------------------------+
| Line 1       | W\ :sub:`1 1`       | W\ :sub:`2 1`       | … | W\ :sub:`nshells 1`       |
+--------------+---------------------+---------------------+---+---------------------------+
| Line 2       | W\ :sub:`1 2`       | W\ :sub:`2 2`       | … | W\ :sub:`nshells 2`       |
+--------------+---------------------+---------------------+---+---------------------------+
| .            | .                   |                     |   | .                         |
+--------------+---------------------+---------------------+---+---------------------------+
| .            |                     | .                   |   | .                         |
+--------------+---------------------+---------------------+---+---------------------------+
| .            |                     |                     | . | .                         |
+--------------+---------------------+---------------------+---+---------------------------+
| Line nshells | W\ :sub:`1 nshells` | W\ :sub:`2 nshells` | … | W\ :sub:`nshells nshells` |
+--------------+---------------------+---------------------+---+---------------------------+


.. _@atomic_third_order:

``@atomic_third_order``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Matrix of 3\ :sup:`rd` order diagonal derivatives 

.. _@atomic_spinorbit_xis:

``@atomic_spinorbit_xis``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Spin-orbit coupling constants

  | Line 1 : :math:`{\xi}`\ :sub:`1` :math:`{\xi}`\ :sub:`2` … :math:`{\xi}`\ :sub:`nshells`


.. _@atomic_onsite_corection:

``@atomic_onsite_corection``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _@atomic_trans_dipole:


``@atomic_trans_dipole``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _@atomic_dipole_corection:

``@atomic_dipole_corection``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
